Learning Module 1: Firm & Market Structures
LOS 1a: determine and interpret breakeven and shutdown points of
production, as well as how economies and diseconomies of scale affect
costs under perfect and imperfect competition
Companies can be grouped as operating in perfect or imperfect competitive environments
depending on the slope of the demand curve.
Perfectly Competitive Environment
In a perfectly competitive environment, firms are the price takers. That is, it must the market
price of its output so that its demand curve is perfectly elastic and horizontal.
In a perfectly competitive environment, marginal revenue (MR) is equal to the price per unit
output (P). Moreover, the average revenue (AR) is also equal to the price per unit. Put simply,
P =MR=AR
3
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.In perfect competition, total revenue (TR) is equal to price times quantity. That is, TR = (P)(Q).
However, note that in perfect competition, the market determines the price. As such, when a
company sells an additional unit, TR rises by an amount equal to the price per unit (P). Consider
the following graph:
4
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Imperfectly Competitive Environment
In the case of imperfect competition, the demand curve has a negative slope.
Assume that a company is monopolistic. In this case, the firm has control over the price. Simply
stated, the price is a function of the quantity. Mathematically, this is stated as:
P =f(Q)
As such, the total revenue (TR) is given by:
5
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.TR=f(Q)×Q
Assuming that the demand curve is linear and negatively sloped, TR is equal to the total
expenditure of all the buyers in the market.
Note that a monopolist sets the price. As such, when the price decreases, the quantity sold
increases. This initially increases the total expenditure by the buyers and, hence, the TR of the
company because a price decrease is overpowered by the increase in units sold. This happens in
the range where MR is positive, and demand is elastic. Consider the following image:
6
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.When the price drops, even though more units are sold, the total spending by buyers decreases
because the price reduction has a greater impact. This happens when marginal revenue (MR) is
negative and demand is inelastic.
Profit-Maximization, Breakeven, and Shutdown Points of
Production
We use the short-run total cost (STC) curves and its associated TR curves to show the profit
maximization point. The short-term run and long run time for a company depends on the ability
of the firm to adjust the amounts of the fixed resources it utilizes.
The short run is the amount of time during which at least one of the factors of production, such
as technology, physical capital, and plant size, is fixed. On the other hand, the long run is the
time period during which all factors of production are variable. Moreover, in the long run,
companies can enter or exit the market depending on the profitability analysis.
The long run is also termed the planning horizon because the company can choose the short-run
position or optimal operating size that maximizes profit. Specifically, a company always operates
in the short run and plans in the long run.
Profit-Maximization Point
7
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Under Perfect Competition
Consider the following demand and average and marginal cost curves for the firm under
conditions of perfect competition:
The company maximizes its profit by producing at an output level of Q∗, where the price matches
the short-run marginal cost (SMC) and the SMC is increasing. However, at a different output,
denoted as Q', even though the price is equivalent to the SMC, the SMC has not yet started to
increase but is still decreasing. Hence, this cannot be a point where profit is maximized.
If the market price were to increase, the company's demand and marginal revenue (MR) curve
would shift upwards, leading the firm to determine a new optimal production output greater than
Q∗. On the contrary, if the market price decreased, the demand and MR curve would move
downward, setting a decreased profit–maximizing output.
8
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.As shown in the image, this company is realizing positive economic profits since the market price
is greater than the average total cost (ATC) when producing at Q∗. This kind of profit is
achievable in the short run. However, in the long run, rival companies would likely enter the
market aiming to obtain some of these profits, subsequently pushing the market price down to
match each company's ATC.
Under Imperfect Competition
Consider the following demand and average and marginal cost curves for the firm under
imperfect competition (monopolist) conditions.
9
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The marginal revenue (MR) and demand curves for a monopolist are not the same. However, the
rule for maximizing profits remains consistent: Identify the quantity (Q) where short-term
marginal cost (SMC) equals MR, which in this instance is at Q∗.
After determining the suitable output level, the best price to set is indicated by the firm's
demand curve at price P∗. The monopolistic company enjoys a positive economic profit since its
price is higher than its average total cost (ATC).
The entry barriers, which grant the firm its monopolistic dominance, ensure that potential
competitors cannot erode the firm's profit margins.
Breakeven Analysis
A firm reaches its breakeven point when its total revenue (TR) matches its total cost (TC).
Similarly, a firm is at the breakeven point when its average revenue (AR) is precisely equal to its
average total cost (ATC). This holds true in both perfect and imperfect competitive environments.
While management usually aims for maximum profits, some firms can only cover all their
economic costs. Economic costs include both accounting and implicit opportunity costs.
When the firm's revenue is equal to its economic costs, it implies that the company can cover the
opportunity cost of all factors of production. In this case, the firm is said to be earning normal
profit but not positive economic profit.
Firms operating in a perfectly competitive environment will not be able to earn a positive
economic profit in the long run because an excess rate of return will lure new entrants into the
market. These newcomers would increase the supply, subsequently pushing the market price
down until every firm merely achieves a normal profit. It's crucial to understand that this
scenario doesn't mean the firm is making zero accounting profit.
Consider the following graph of a firm under perfect competition:
10
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Recall that the best a firm can do is to break even. Note that in the graph above, the level of
output where SMC = MR is where P = ATC. This implies that economic profit is zero, and the
firm is at a breakeven point.
The equivalent graph of a monopolist firm is shown below:
11
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Shutdown Analysis
In the long run, if a firm can't make zero economic profit, it will shut down as it can't cover all its
costs, including labor and capital. But in the short run, a firm might keep operating even if it
doesn't make zero economic profit.
Recall that fixed costs are expenses that remain constant regardless of a company's production
level, such as rent and fixed interest charges. On the other hand, variable costs are directly tied
to the volume of production and include items like raw materials, wages, and other costs that
12
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.vary based on production levels.
As long as the firm's revenues cover its variable costs, it can continue operations, covering both
variable and a portion of its fixed costs (essentially operating at a loss). This is possible if the
price (P) per unit is greater than the average variable cost (AVC).
However, in the long run, the firm should exit the industry if market prices do not increase, as it
becomes unsustainable to stay in the market without the potential for higher returns.
When deciding whether to continue operating in the short run, it is essential to disregard sunk
costs since they have already been incurred and are irrecoverable, regardless of the firm's
choice.
This is shown in the graph below:
13
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.When the price is higher than P , the firm has the potential to achieve a positive profit, and it
1
definitely should remain in operation. If the price falls below P , which represents the lowest
2
average variable cost (AVC), the firm will fail to cover its variable expenses, and it should cease
operations.
For prices ranging between P2 and P1, it's beneficial for the firm to keep operating in the short
term because it can meet all variable costs and contribute to covering the fixed costs.
The lowest point on the AVC curve is the shutdown point, and the lowest point on the average
total cost (ATC) is the breakeven point.
14
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The following table shows the conditions for a firm to operate, shut down, or exit the market in
the short and long run.
Relationship between Short-Term Decision Long-Run-Decision
Revenue and Costs
Total cost = Total Remain in the market Remain in the market
revenue
Total revenue < Total Remain in the market Leave the market
costs and > Total
variable costs
Total revenue < Total Cease production Cease operating in
variable cost the market
Example: Shut-down Point of Production
Assume that a manufacturing company produces 1000 units and sells them at $5 each (Total
Revenue (TR) is 5 × 1,000=$5,000), Average Total Cost (ATC) is $7,000, fixed cost (FC) is $4000,
and a variable cost (VC) is $3,000 for all units.
Evidently, this manufacturing company is operating at a loss of -$2000 (economic loss). In
economics, we assume that the FC cannot be avoided. The company is obliged to pay it up
regardless of whether it operates or not. That is, if it closes its operations, the revenue will be
zero, but it will still incur a $4,000 fixed cost.
If it continues its operations, it will earn a revenue of $5,000, pay a variable cost of $3,000, and
use $2,000 to pay the fixed cost. In this instance, the company will lose less by continuing its
operations. However, the company will exit the market in the long run unless prices increase
because, eventually, the average variable costs exceed average revenue (AR). Thus, it will shut
down at the point of minimum average variable cost (AVC), as seen on the graph.
Economies and Diseconomies of Scale with Short-run and
Long-run Cost Analysis
Recall that the distinction between the short run and long run for any firm depends on its
capacity to modify the quantities of fixed resources it employs. In the short run, the firm
experiences a time period during which at least one factor of production, such as technology,
15
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.physical capital, or plant size, remains fixed. On the other hand, the long run is characterized by
a time period in which all factors of production are variable and can be adjusted.
The duration of long-run adjustments varies across industries, with capital-intensive firms
generally requiring more time for adaptations compared to labor-intensive firms.
Short-Run Cost Curves
In short-run curves, we assume that the capital input is constant so that the output varies
depending on the level of labor, which is the variable input in this case. However, if the capital
input were to vary, we would have to generate short-run cost curves for each level of capital
input.
The short-run total cost (STC) often increases with output. Initially, it rises at a diminishing rate
due to the economies of specialization. However, as output grows, the curve ascends at an
accelerating rate due to the law of diminishing marginal returns to labor.
Total fixed cost (TFC) determines the vertical intercept of the STC curve. When there's more
fixed input, the total fixed cost (TFC) is higher. However, this also means that the firm's
production capacity increases.
For every short-run total cost (STC) curve, there's a related short-run average total cost (SATC)
curve. Additionally, there's a corresponding long-run average total cost (LRAC) curve, which
serves as the envelope curve encompassing all potential short-run average total cost curves.
Economies and Diseconomies of Scale
When a firm enhances its output by increasing all of its inputs, it is said to be scaling up
production. Economies of scale come into play when the firm experiences a decrease in the cost
per unit of production as it expands its output.
In the case of economies of scale, LRAC has a negative slope. Consider the following graph with
SATC for each level of capital input (levels 1,2,3 and 4) in the case of economies of scale.
16
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The following factors can lead to economies of scale:
Achieving economies of scale through increasing returns to scale means the production
process yields output increases proportionately larger than the increase in inputs.
Implementing a division of labor and management to allow workers to specialize in
specific tasks, leading to improved job proficiency.
Enhancing productivity by investing in more expensive and efficient equipment.
Effectively reducing waste and lowering costs by capitalizing on marketable by-
products, reducing energy consumption, and implementing enhanced quality control
measures.
Utilizing market information and knowledge to make more effective managerial
decisions.
Capitalizing on discounted prices when purchasing resources in larger quantities.
Conversely, diseconomies of scale occur when the cost per unit rises as the firm further
increases its production. This implies that LRAC has a positive slope. Consider the following
graph with SATC for each level of capital input (levels 1,2,3 and 4) in the case of diseconomies of
scale:
17
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The following factors can result in diseconomies of scale:
Experiencing diseconomies of scale due to decreasing returns, where the production
process results in output increases that are proportionately smaller than the increase
in inputs.
Struggling with proper management due to excessive size.
Encountering inefficiencies caused by overlapping and duplicating business functions
and product lines.
Facing higher resource prices due to supply constraints when purchasing inputs in
large quantities.
Economies of scale and diseconomies of scale can coexist; their effect on the long-run average
total cost (LRAC) depends on which one has a stronger influence.
If the economies of scale are more influential, the LRAC will decline as output increases.
Conversely, if diseconomies of scale are more prevalent, the opposite happens. It's possible for
the LRAC to first decrease (due to economies of scale) over a certain output range, then stabilize
over another range, and subsequently increase in a range where diseconomies of scale take
18
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.effect.
Theoretically speaking, perfect competition compels a firm to function at the lowest point of the
long-run average total cost (LRAC) curve. This is because, over the long term, the market price
will settle at this point. If a firm doesn't operate at this optimal cost-efficiency point, its
sustainability in the long run could be at risk.
19
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question #1
A firm that increases the quantity it produces without any change in per-unit cost is
experiencing:
A. Economies of scale.
B. Diseconomies of scale.
C. Constant returns to scale.
Solution
The correct answer is C.
An increase in output proportional to an increase in input would be considered a
constant return to scale. This is neither an economies nor diseconomies of scale.
Question #2
The short-term shut-down point of production for a firm operating under perfect
competition will most likely occur when the price per unit is equal to:
A. Marginal cost per unit.
B. Average total cost per unit.
C. Average variable cost per unit.
Solution
The correct answer is C.
Any firm will shut down its production when the marginal cost is less than the
average variable cost. We will see later that for a firm in perfect competition to
maximize profit, marginal revenue must be equal to marginal cost.
20
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 1b: describe characteristics of perfect competition, monopolistic
competition, oligopoly, and pure monopoly
Market structure can be defined as the characteristics of a market, which can either be
competitive or organizational. Moreover, market structure outlines the nature of the competition
and the pricing procedure in a market. Therefore, it describes the number of entities producing
similar goods and services in a market and whose structure is determined by the current
competition in the market.
The following key factors influence market structure:
1. The quantity and relative magnitude of firms involved in supplying the product.
2. The level of product differentiation present in the market.
3. The seller's power over pricing decisions.
4. The strength of barriers regulating market entry and exit.
5. The extent of non-price competition observed in the market.
There are four types of economic market structures (organized from the least competitive to the
most competitive):
1. Perfect competition.
2. Monopolistic competition.
3. Monopoly market structure.
4. Oligopoly market structure.
Perfect Competition
Perfect competition refers to a market with many buyers and sellers, similar products, and
substitutes. A good example is agriculture, where all rice farmers sell homogeneous products to
consumers.
Characteristics of Perfect Competition
21
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.1. There exist a vast number of buyers.
2. There exists a vast number of sellers willing to supply their products at given
market prices.
3. No single seller or producer is large enough to influence the market price.
4. Homogeneous products: the products being sold in this market are perfect
substitutes for one another. Their quality and characteristics don't vary from one
another.
5. Perfect information: Every consumer and producer is aware of the market prices
and the utility derived from using any of the products.
6. There are no entry barriers.
Monopolistic Competition
This is an imperfect competition in which several producers sell products that are different from
one another. The difference lies in branding or, in most cases, quality. This means that the goods
are not perfect substitutes for one another but are close substitutes. An example of this can be
clothing, where marketing and branding are the main marks of distinction among different but
similar black shirts. Another example would be the fast-food industry, where a burger made by
McDonald's is quite similar to a burger made by Burger King from an economic standpoint.
Consumers, nevertheless, usually have a preference between the two chains.
Characteristics of Monopolistic Competition
1. There are many producers and consumers in the market.
2. There is not one firm that has total control over the price of the market.
3. Consumers assume that there are non-price differences among the products of
competitors.
4. Few barriers to entry and exit exist.
5. Producers have some control over prices.
6. Producers and consumers have no perfect information.
22
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Monopoly
A monopoly is a market consisting of a single firm that produces goods with no close substitutes.
Often, this market has many entry barriers. For instance, water providers, natural gas,
telecommunications, and electricity are often granted exclusive rights to service.
Characteristics of a Monopoly
1. A monopoly is a profit maximizer.
2. Monopolies are price makers.
3. Price discrimination: Monopolies can change both the price and quality of their
products.
4. There are very high barriers to entry for other firms.
5. There is a single seller that controls the whole market.
6. The government regulates pure monopolies.
Oligopoly
An oligopoly market consists of a small number of relatively large firms that produce similar but
slightly different products. Under oligopolies, there also exist some entry barriers with which
other enterprises have to contend. Good examples include industries such as oil & gas, airlines,
and automakers.
Characteristics of an Oligopoly
1. Only a few firms operate in the market.
2. Profit maximization is a condition in this market.
3. Monopolies set their own prices.
4. Barriers to entry are high.
5. Firms make abnormal profits in the long run.
6. Products may be homogeneous.
23
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.7. There is a relatively small number of firms supplying the market.
Summary of Characteristics of Market Structures
Type of Number of Product Differentiation Barriers Pricing Non-Price
Market Sellers to Entry Power Competition
Structure
Perfect Many Homogeneous/standardized Very low None None
competition
Monopolistic Many Differentiated Low Some Advertising and
competition Product
Differentiation
Oligopoly Few Homogeneous/standardized High Some or Advertising and
Considerable Product
Differentiation
Monopoly One Unique Product Very High Considerable Advertising
24
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
An industry is made up of twenty firms. These firms produce products that easily
complement one another, and there are no barriers to entry. This industry can be best
characterized as:
A. An oligopoly.
B. A monopolistic competition.
C. Perfect competition.
Solution
The correct answer is C.
Even though there are only twenty firms in the industry, there are no barriers to
entry, and the products can easily complement one another (no branding or quality
constraints).
Firms voluntarily choose not to enter the market.
A is incorrect. In an oligopoly, barriers to entry are high.
B is incorrect. In monopolistic competition, barriers to entry and exit exist.
25
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 1c: explain supply and demand relationships under monopolistic
competition, including the optimal price and output for firms as well as
pricing strategy
Demand Analysis under Monopolistic Competition
In monopolistic competition, firms have a downward-sloping demand curve, meaning lower
prices lead to more demand and vice versa. At some prices, demand is very responsive to
changes (elastic), and at lower prices, demand is less responsive (inelastic).
In the short run, a firm maximizes its profit by producing the level of output where marginal
revenue (MR) equals marginal cost (MC).
In the graph above, the optimal output level is represented by Q1, while P1 represents the price
consumers are prepared to pay for this quantity. The rectangle formed by P multiplied by Q
1 1
represents the total revenue.
26
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Supply Analysis under Monopolistic Competition
In this market structure, the supply function is also not well-defined. The appropriate output
level is determined by the point where the Marginal Cost and Marginal Revenue curves intersect
(MC=MR).
However, it is important to note that the price will be charged in accordance with the demand
schedule of the market. The supply curve of a firm should measure the quantity that the firm is
willing and able to supply at different price levels. Unfortunately, the marginal revenue and
marginal cost do not include this information.
Optimal Price and Output under Monopolistic Competition
In this market structure, the short-run profit-maximizing choice occurs when marginal revenue
equals marginal cost (MR=MC). Total revenue (TR) is a product of price and quantity:
TR=P ×Q
The average cost incurred in producing Q units of a product is taken as C. Therefore, the total
cost (TC) is calculated as the product of average cost and total quantity. That is,
TC =C ×Q
The economic profit is the difference between T R and T C. We denote the economic profit by π.
Then,
π=TR−TC
Long-Run Equilibrium under Monopolistic Competition
As firms under monopolistic competition start reporting higher profits, more firms will venture
into the market. Since entrant prices are low, customers will shift to buying products from these
new firms. This will reduce the demand for firms that produce similar goods.
27
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.As a result, the economic profits realized by firms in monopolistic competition will fall. Further,
firms will incur advertising costs for product differentiation. This can be seen in consumer
products, such as clothing, with high advertising costs. For example, large sporting brands pay
lucrative contracts to professional sports personalities to differentiate themselves from the
competition.
Consider the following diagram:
In long-run equilibrium, the optimal output level is still determined where marginal revenue
(MR) equals marginal cost (MC), represented by Q . The price that consumers are prepared to
1
pay for a specific quantity of the product is derived from the demand curve, in this case, Q , for
1
the price P .
1
28
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The total revenue (TR) is represented by the area of the rectangle formed by multiplying P by
1
Q . It's important to observe that, in contrast to the long-run equilibrium in a perfectly
1
competitive market, the equilibrium in a monopolistic competition market is situated at a higher
average cost than the output level that minimizes average cost.
The average cost does not hit its lowest point until the output reaches Q . In this long-run
2
equilibrium scenario, the total cost is represented by the area of the rectangle obtained by
multiplying C by Q . The economic profit can be calculated by subtracting the total cost from
1 1
the total revenue.
Note that in the graph above, the economic is zero economic profit since total revenue equals
total cost. Mathematically,
P
1
×Q 1=C
1
×Q
1
Note that the zero economic profit is the same for both monopolistic competition and perfect
competition in the long run. However, the long-run level of output in Q is less than Q , which
1 2
represents the minimum average cost of production and long-run level of output in a perfectly
competitive market.
29
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
A firm that is operating under a monopolistic competition maximizes its profits when:
A. The average cost is minimized.
B. Marginal revenue equals average cost.
C. Marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
Solution
The correct answer is C.
The firm will maximize its profit when the level of output is such that the marginal
revenue equals marginal cost. In other words, it will produce a quantity such that
MR=MC.
A and B are incorrect. From the graph given below, we can clearly see that it's
neither the point where average cost is minimized nor the point where marginal
revenue equals average cost.
30
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 1d: explain supply and demand relationships under oligopoly,
including the optimal price and output for firms as well as pricing
strategy
Demand Analysis under Oligopoly Competition
The demand curves in oligopoly markets are influenced by the level of pricing interdependence
among firms. When collusion exists in a market, the aggregate market demand curve is divided
among the individual producers. In contrast, each firm faces its own demand curve in non-
colluding market scenarios. Additionally, the demand characteristics in non-colluding oligopoly
markets are shaped by the pricing strategies employed by the participating firms.
Three primary pricing strategies include Pricing interdependence, the Cournot assumption,
and the Nash equilibrium.
Price Interdependence
In oligopolies, price interdependence means that firms' pricing actions are linked. In these
markets, it's often assumed that competitors will lower prices to keep their customers and avoid
raising prices to lure customers away from rivals.
The idea is that by matching a competitor's lower price, the company won't see a drop in
customer interest. On the other hand, by not raising prices like another company, they can pull in
customers from the company that did.
Customers of a firm are highly responsive to price increases when its competitors offer lower
prices. On the other hand, customers become less responsive to price decreases because the
firm's rivals are likely to match its price changes.
As a result, there are two different demand structures:
i. One for price increases.
ii. Another for price reductions.
Note that each demand curve will have its own marginal revenue. Denote the demand and
31
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.marginal revenue curve by D and MR when the price increases and by D and MR when
P↑ P↑ P↓ P↓
the prices fall. Consider the following diagram:
From the above diagram, the overall demand can be seen as D =D
P↑
+D
P↓
. This oligopolistic
pricing strategy leads to a kinked demand curve, where the two segments represent distinct
competitor reactions to price changes. The kink in the demand curve creates two parts in the
marginal revenue structure. One part is connected to price increases, and the other is related to
price decreases.
Observe the following kinked demand curve in the Oligopoly market:
32
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.If the company has low marginal costs, labeled as MC , the earlier rule of setting marginal
1
revenue (MR) equal to marginal cost (MC) remains true even in an oligopoly. The marginal cost
can increase to MC and MC before affecting the firm's profit. If the MC curve intersects the
2 3 2
space in the marginal revenue, the best price-output combo stays the same at the current price
and initial output level.
The Cournot Assumption
Under the Cournot assumption, each firm determines its optimal production level, assuming that
the output of other firms will remain unaltered. Their goal is to maximize profits while expecting
the other firm to maintain a constant output in the future.
Cournot assumption makes pricing strategy easier as there's no need to predict a competitor's
response. It offers a practical way to study actions in oligopoly markets. Consider the simplest
oligopoly scenario: a duopoly with two firms. When in equilibrium, neither wishes to alter
33
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.production based on the other's output. Each company tries to maximize profits, thinking the
other will maintain its current production level.
The Cournot strategy approach is believed to persist until both firms reach their long-run
equilibrium. In this equilibrium, both output and price stabilize, and no changes in price or
output can result in increased profits for either firm.
The Nash Equilibrium
The Nash equilibrium occurs when participants in a non-cooperative market choose strategies
and stick to them, even after considering their opponents' strategies.
In oligopoly markets, the Nash equilibrium is characterized by the fact that no firm in the
oligopoly can increase its profits by unilaterally altering its pricing strategy. The basic
assumption is that each participating firm does the best it can, considering the reactions of its
rivals.
In other words, each firm expects the other firms to respond to any change made by competitors
by doing their best under the changed circumstances.
In the oligopoly market, firms' actions are interdependent and non-corporative, with each firm
making decisions that maximize its own profits. In other words, the firms do not collude.
Equilibrium is achieved when all firms are striving to do their best in their interest, considering
the actions of their rivals.
Example: Illustrating Nash Equilibrium
Consider a duopoly with companies A and B. Both companies can change high or low prices for
their products. The following table gives the amount of profits each company receives if it
charges a high or low price:
34
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The interpretation of the table is as follows: Consider the top left corner cell. The cell shows that
when both companies offer the product at low prices, company A earns a profit of 60, and
company B earns 80.
It is easy to see that both companies earn a maximum combined profits of 1,000 if both
companies charge high prices.
Recall that according to Nash equilibrium, each firm behaves in its own best interest. In our case
above, company B can improve its position by charging low prices when company A charges high
prices. Specifically, in the lower left cell, company B earns a profit of 450 when company A
charges a high price of 400.
Notice that company A can earn a maximum profit of 600 only if company B agrees to charge a
high price. However, this is not in Company B's best interest because it can still earn a profit of
450 by charging lower prices.
Collusion in Oligopoly Markets
In oligopolistic industries, the conditions promote collusion as there are only a few competitors,
and their pricing behavior is interdependent. Collusion is motivated by several factors, such as
the potential for increased profits, the desire to reduce uncertainty in cash flow, and the
opportunity to create barriers that discourage new entrants.
When firms openly and formally establish collusive agreements, they form a cartel. Six factors
significantly influence the chances of successful collusion:
35
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.1. The number and size distribution of sellers: Collusion is more likely to succeed in
markets with a small number of firms or when one firm dominates the market.
2. The similarity of the products: Collusion has a higher chance of success when the
products are homogeneous and indistinguishable.
3. Cost structure: Successful collusion is more probable when the participating firms have
similar cost structures.
4. Order size and frequency: Collusion is more likely to be successful when orders are
frequent, regular, and of relatively small sizes.
5. The strength and severity of retaliation: The fear of severe retaliation discourages
firms from breaking collusive agreements.
6. The degree of external competition: Collusive agreements have higher chances of
success when external competitors face higher production costs.
In oligopolistic markets, another notable decision-making strategy is the first-mover advantage
in the Stackelberg model. This model assumes sequential decision-making, where the leader firm
selects its output first, and then the follower firm chooses after observing the leader's output.
The leader firm gains an advantage by being the first mover in this scenario.
Demand, Supply Analysis under Oligopoly Competition
Just like in monopolistic competition, the oligopoly firm lacks a well-defined supply function. It's
impossible to ascertain the oligopolist's best output and price without considering the demand
conditions and competitors' moves. Still, the oligopolist possesses a cost function that indicates
the optimal supply level. Thus, the previously stated rule remains true: The output level
maximizing profit occurs where MR = MC.
The price charged by the oligopolist is determined by what the consumers are willing to pay.
Therefore, the equilibrium price results from the demand curve, while the output levels result
from the association between the MR and the MC.
A dominant firm in an oligopoly market is one that has greater capacity, a lower cost structure, is
a pioneer in the market, or has secured greater customer loyalty. As such, the dominant firm
becomes the price maker with similar powers as monopolists.
36
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.The other firms in the market follow the pricing strategies of the dominant firm. The followers
cannot undermine the dominant firm because the leader has a lower cost of production.
Surprisingly, the price followers would rather charge a higher price than the dominant firms'
price.
Optimal Price and Output in Oligopoly Markets
There is no optimum price and output analysis that applies to all oligopoly market scenarios. The
interdependence of the few firms in an oligopoly leads to an intricate range of pricing options,
which vary based on the specific market conditions.
For instance, in a kinked demand curve, the optimum price is the prevailing price at the kink on
the demand function. However, when a dominant market exists, the optimum price is determined
at a point where MR = MC. The profit-maximizing price is based on the output position of the
part of the demand function faced by the dominant firm.
Factors Affecting Long-Run Equilibrium in Oligopoly Markets
In the long run, there is a possibility for economic profits in oligopoly markets. However, the
market share of a dominant firm will decline in the long run. As is always the case, profits will
attract more firms to enter the oligopoly market.
Over time, marginal costs incurred by entrant firms fall due to the adoption of more efficient
production methods. Likewise, the profitability of the dominant firm declines. The reactions of
entrant firms are included in the optimal pricing strategy.
Some firms may decide to incorporate innovation as a way of maintaining market leadership. For
example, Shell's gasoline is said to clean the engine valves and fuel injectors. However, these
innovations are usually not very effective at maintaining the market share of the dominant firm.
Generally, an optimal pricing strategy, in the long run, incorporates the reactions of rival firms to
changes in prices effected by competitors. However, history shows price wars are not beneficial,
as market share gains are often fleeting. For instance, cutting prices to outdo rivals reduces
overall earnings for everyone in the oligopoly.
37
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
Which of the following is a factor that influences the chances of a successful
collusion?
A. Similarity in cost structures.
B. Presence of a dominant firm.
C. Infrequent, large order sizes.
Solution
The correct answer is A.
Successful collusion is more probable when the participating firms have similar cost
structures.
B is incorrect. Collusion is more likely to succeed in markets with a small number of
firms or when one firm dominates the market.
C is incorrect. Collusion is more likely to be successful when orders are frequent,
regular, and of relatively small sizes.
38
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 1e: identify the type of market structure within which a firm
operates and describe the use and limitations of concentration measures
Monopoly markets and situations where companies hold pricing power can result in
inefficiencies. Nevertheless, government agencies and regulators face the difficult task of
assessing market power and determining if a firm has a dominant position. This requires
regulators to measure whether future events that have not yet occurred might lead to excessive
market power.
Econometric Approaches
To gauge market power, one can estimate the elasticity of demand and supply in the market. If
demand is elastic, the market exhibits characteristics similar to perfect competition. On the
contrary, if it is inelastic, companies may possess market power.
A challenge arises because the observed values of price and quantity may not accurately reflect
the true values of supply and demand. To calculate elasticity, a model with two equations is
necessary: one for the demanded quantity and another for the supplied quantity. This, in turn,
requires a substantial number of observations, leading to the additional problem of potential
changes in market structure over the extended data collection period.
Alternatively, a cross-sectional regression analysis can be employed, where sales from various
companies in the market are observed within a single period. Nevertheless, implementing this
approach demands a significant effort in data collection.
To address these issues, we employ more straightforward metrics such as:
Concentration Ratio
The concentration ratio is the sum of market shares covered by the largest N firms in a market.
It is determined by finding the sales value for the largest firms and dividing it by the total market
sales.
39
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Therefore, the resulting figure lies between zero (for perfect competition) and 100 (for
monopolies).
The main advantage of this concentration measure is the simplicity of its calculation. However,
there are some limitations to the usage of this method.
Example: Concentration Ratio
Suppose there are 10 producing companies in a market. The production percentages for the top
three companies are 35%, 20%, and 10%. Calculate the concentration ratio for these three
companies.
Solution
The concentration ratio is the sum of market shares covered by the largest N firms. So, the
concentration ratio for the first 3 companies are:
Concentration ratio=35%+20%+10%=65
Limitations of the Concentration Ratio
This method cannot quantify market power directly. The big question should be whether high
concentration levels can be interpreted as an indication of monopoly power. An example is the
case of only one sugar company in a country. This company enjoys monopoly power. However, the
problem comes when there exist large wholesalers in, say, the food sector. These wholesalers
may decide to import sugar alongside their range of products. As a result, this will most likely
compel the sugar company to adjust its prices as if it's in perfect competition.
The concentration ratio tends not to be affected by mergers among the top market incumbents.
If there exists a merger between the largest and second-largest companies, their combined
pricing power is most likely to be larger than that of the two pre-existing companies, which the
concentration ratio will not accurately represent.
The Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI)
40
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Economists OC Herfindahl and A.O. Hirschman came up with an index that first squares the
market shares of top N companies. These squares are then summed up. The Herfindahl-
Hirschman Index (HHI) for a monopoly firm should equal 1.
Consequently, in the case of M firms with equal market shares, the HHI should be equal to 1 .
M
This is a very useful gauge for interpreting the HHI. This measure was developed to try and
overcome some issues associated with the concentration ratio.
This measure was developed to try and overcome some issues associated with the concentration
ratio.
Example: Herfindahl–Hirschman Index (HHI)
Using the same example as above, the HHI for the top three companies can be calculated as:
HHI =0.352+0.202+0.102= 0.1725
Limitations of the HHI
The HHI does not consider the elasticity of demand; thus, it cannot approximate the potential
profitability of a single company or a group of companies.
HHI does not consider barriers to entry.
41
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
Which of the following best describes a market structure with only one buyer?
A. Monopoly.
B. Monopsony.
C. Monopolistic competitive market.
Solution
The correct answer is B.
A monopsony has only one buyer.
A is incorrect. A monopoly has one seller but many buyers.
C is incorrect. A monopolistic competitive market has many buyers and fairly many
sellers.
Question
If a market has 5 suppliers and each of the top two suppliers holds 20 percent of the
market share, which of the following best represents the concentration ratio for the
top 2 suppliers and their respective HHI?
A. Concentration ratio = 4%; HHI = 40.
B. Concentration ratio = 40%; HHI = 0.08.
C. Concentration ratio = 40%; HHI = 0.4.
Solution
The correct answer is B.
The concentration ratio is the sum of the two suppliers' market share.
42
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Therefore, 20%+20%= 40%.
For the HHI, we take 0.202×2= 0.08.
43
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.
