Learning Module 6: International Trade
LOS 6a: describe the benefits and costs of international trade
Most economists agree that the advantages of international trade overweigh the disadvantages.
Below are the main benefits and costs associated with international trade.
Benefits of International Trade
Countries gain from exchange and specialization: Countries receive high prices
for exports and pay lower prices for imports (instead of producing them at a higher
cost), which in turn enables a more efficient resource allocation as a country will
increase its production of the goods it exports and reduce its production of the goods it
imports.
Trade liberalization increases real GDP: efficient resource allocation, learning by
doing, higher productivity, knowledge spillovers, and trade-induced changes in policies
that affect incentives for innovation are all factors that can increase a country's GDP.
International trade offers a platform for exchanging ideas and for the free flow
of technical expertise.
International trade can lead to the development of better-quality institutions
and policies that encourage domestic innovations.
Greater efficiency in that countries that have a comparative advantage in the
production of a specific commodity will specialize in the production of the said
commodity.
Industries experience economies of scale: Many industries, for instance, the
automobile industry in Europe, experience economies of scale. As these industries
grow and have larger market sizes, their average production costs per unit decrease.
Increased competition: Foreign competition can reduce the monopoly power of
140
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.domestic firms, pushing them to become more efficient.
Costs of International Trade
Loss of jobs and inequality in income in developed countries caused by
competition from importing from other countries.
Less efficient firms may exit the market as a result of resource reallocation in an
industry depending on whether it is exporting(expanding) or facing import
competition(contracting). As the less efficient farms exit the market, unemployment
rates increase in developed countries and there may be need to retrain the displaced
workers for jobs in expanding (exporting) industries.
141
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
Among the following, which one is least likely a cost of international trade?
A. Loss of jobs.
B. Inequality in income.
C. Availability of products.
Solution
The correct answer is C.
Due to the removal of tariffs and restrictions, companies produce and ship various
goods across the globe. The consumer can then choose among all of these products.
A and B are incorrect. Some costs, such as inequality in income and
unemployment, can be incurred. This has been seen in the past few decades, where
most manufacturers have moved from Western to Eastern countries. Westerners have
been able to buy goods at cheaper prices, but many manufacturing firms have closed
shop simultaneously, leaving workers unemployed.
142
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 6b: compare types of trade restrictions, such as tariffs, quotas, and
export subsidies, and their economic implications
Governments may enact policies that limit the free exchange of goods and services between
countries. Such policies are known as trade restrictions or trade protections and include tariffs,
import quotas, voluntary export restraints (VER), subsidies, embargoes, domestic content
requirements, and capital restrictions.
Trade restrictions are used to: Protect already established domestic industries from foreign
competition, protect new domestic industries from foreign competition until they get established,
protect and increase domestic employment, generate income from imposed tariffs, retaliate
against the restrictions imposed by another country, and to protect certain industries/sectors for
national security purposes.
Different trade restrictions are discussed below:
Tariffs
A tariff is a type of tax that imposes additional costs on imports. Tariffs primarily aim to protect
the domestic industries that produce similar goods and to reduce trade deficits.
The economic impact of tariffs is reduced demand for imported goods as they will be trading at a
price above the free trade price.
We need to define “small” and “large” countries in the context of tariffs. A small country is a
price taker and cannot influence market prices whereas a large country is a large importer of
goods and can influence the world market price.
Tariffs imported by large countries will force exporters to reduce the price of goods/services to
retain their market share in the importing country, thereby altering the terms of trade and
redistributing income from the exporting to the importing country.
As such, theoretically, a large country can only increase its welfare through tariffs if its trading
partner does not retaliate and if the benefits of improving the terms of trade are greater than the
143
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.deadweight loss resulting from the tariff.
In summary, the net welfare effects of tariffs are:
Loss of consumer surplus due to price increase.
A gain in producer surplus as local producers can sell their output at higher prices.
Gain of tariff revenue to the government.
Note: The loss in consumer surplus is greater than the gain from producer surplus and
increased tariff revenue to the government, thereby resulting in a deadweight loss to a country's
welfare.
Import Quotas
Import quotas refer to the regulations set by a country that restrict the amount of a specific good
that can be imported into the country, usually for a specified period. On the other hand, import
licenses specify the quantity of goods that can be imported into a country.
As compared to tariffs where the government of the country imposing the tariff gains tariff
revenue, the effect of quotas on the government is uncertain. Foreign producers can raise their
prices after a country imposes a quota to gain higher profits than they would without the quota.
These profits are known as quota rents.
The welfare loss to an importing country after imposing import quotas is greater
than that under an equivalent tariff. However, the loss can be similar to that of
an equivalent tariff if the government of the importing country can capture the
quota rents by auctioning import licenses at a fee.
Voluntary Export Restraints (VER)
As opposed to an import quota that is created by the government of an importing country, a VER
is created by the government of the exporting country to limit the number of goods it can export
to its trading partner. A VER allows the quota rent resulting from the decrease in trade to be
144
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.captured by the exporting country, resulting in a welfare loss to the importing country.
Export Subsidies
An export subsidy is when the government pays a firm for each unit it exports in a bid to
stimulate exports.
Export subsidies disrupt the functioning of the free market and distort trade away from
comparative advantage, thereby reducing welfare.
Importing Countries may impose countervailing duties, which are taxes levied by an importing
country on subsidized goods entering the country.
Export subsidies may create an incentive for domestic producers to shift their sales from the
domestic to the export market to benefit from higher prices (international price plus the export
subsidy), increasing the price of the goods in the domestic markets by the amount of the subsidy
for a small country.
For a large country, the world price will decline as the large country increases exports. As such,
the net effect in both the large and small countries is negative, with large countries experiencing
a higher decline.
Capital Restrictions
Capital restrictions refer to the measures a government or central bank takes to control the flow
of capital. This could be capital flowing in and out of the economy. Controls include taxes, tariffs,
volume restrictions, etc., whereas regulations include foreign exchange, tax regulation, credit
regulation, and investment restrictions.
They have similar effects as trade restrictions – protect domestic industries – but capital
restrictions can slow growth, and more restrictions can mean higher domestic prices for goods.
Controls are useful when they enable a government to deal with currency exchange rates and
145
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.interest rates. The government benefits from tariffs since they are a type of revenue (tax).
Industries benefit from reduced competition since import prices are high. On the flip side,
consumers do not benefit because the increase in import prices means higher prices. The most
apparent difference between trade restrictions and capital restrictions is that trade restrictions
limit access to a wide range of goods and services. In contrast, capital restrictions limit access to
financial markets.
Other Restrictions
Domestic content provisions specify that some proportion of the value added or
components used in production should be of domestic origin.
Embargo is a government order that restricts trade or commerce with a specified
country or the exchange of specific goods. Embargoes are typically enacted due to
unfavorable political or economic circumstances between nations.
Summary of Effect of Trade Restrictions
on Producer and Consumer Surpluses
Tariff Import Export VER
Quota Subsidy
Impact on Importing Importing Exporting Importing
Country Country Country Country
Producer Increases Increases Increases Increases
Surplus
Consumer Decreases Decreases Decreases Decreases
Surplus
Price Increases Increases Increases Increases
Domestic Decreases Decreases Decreases Decreases
Consumption
Domestic Increases Increases Increases Increases
Production
Trade Imports Imports Exports Imports
decrease decrease decrease decrease
146
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Summary of Effect of Trade Restrictions on
Government Revenue and National Welfare.
Tariff Import Export VER
Quota Subsidy
Government Increases Decreases No change
Mixed
Revenue
(depends on
whether quota
rents are
captured by
the importers
or exporters)
National Decreases in Decreases in Decreases Decreases
Welfare small countries small countries
and increases and increases
in the larger in the larger
country. country.
147
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
Which of the following trade restrictions will most likely increase the revenue of the
country imposing the restriction?
A. Tariffs.
B. Import Quotas.
C. Export subsidies.
Solution
The correct answer is A.
The government of the country imposing tariffs (taxes that impose additional revenue
on imported goods) gains the tariff revenue.
B is incorrect. Import quotas will only benefit the government if it sells import
licenses. Import quotas majorly benefit foreign producers as they sell their produce at
a higher price to capture the quota rent.
C is incorrect. Export subsidies decrease revenue to the government as the
government spends to pay firms for each unit they export.
148
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.LOS 6c: explain the motivations for and advantages of trading blocs,
common markets, and economic unions
A trading bloc is a group of countries that have mutually agreed to reduce and progressively
eliminate barriers to trade and the movement of factors of production among the members of the
bloc.
Regional barriers to trade, such as tariffs, within members of a trading bloc are usually low or
non-existent. Examples of trading blocs include the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Types of Trading Blocs
Free Trade Area (FTA)
In FTA, all barriers to the flow of goods and services among the members have been removed.
Each member within the FTA retains its trade policies against non-members.
An example of an FTA is the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA).
Customs Union
The Customs Union is an improvement of the FTA. It allows the free flow of goods and services
among the members and has a common trade policy against non-members. An example of a
customs union is Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxemburg (Benelux) of 1947.
Common Markets
Common markets incorporate all features of the customs union and also allow the free movement
of factors of production among its members. Examples include the East African Common Market
and The Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR) of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and
Uruguay.
149
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Economic Union
The economic union has a higher economic integration level than the common market. It
includes all features of the common market and additionally incorporates common economic
institutions and coordination of economic policies among members.
If the members of the economic union agree to have a common currency, then it is also called the
monetary union. An example of an economic union (also a monetary union) is the European
Union (EU).
Regional Integration
We can view regional integration as a move towards freer trade, where members get preferential
treatment as compared to non-members. Members eliminate or reduce trade barriers against
each other, resulting in a more efficient resource allocation.
Trade creation and trade diversion are the two static effects directly resulting from the creation
of the customs union.
Trade creation: This is when regional integration results in member countries replacing higher-
cost domestic production with lower-cost imports from other members.
Trade diversion: This is when member countries replace lower-cost imports from non-member
countries with higher-cost imports from member countries. The higher-cost imports from
member countries will be cheaper because of the elimination of trade barriers (tariffs on
imports) between member countries.
The net welfare to a country is positive if trade creation is larger than trade diversification.
Advantages of Trading Blocs
Improved specialization based on comparative advantage: Trading blocs allow
member countries to focus on producing goods where they have a cost advantage,
150
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.leading to efficient resource utilization.
Reduction in monopoly power due to foreign competition: With more players in
the market, monopolistic power diminishes, leading to competitive prices and enhanced
product quality.
Economies of scale from larger market size: larger markets provided by trading
blocs enable firms to produce on a larger scale, leading to reduced costs per unit.
Learning by doing: As countries trade and produce more, they gain experience and
expertise, resulting in improved production methods and efficiencies.
Technology transfer: Trading blocs facilitate the sharing of technology between
member nations, leading to modernization and improved production capacities.
Knowledge spillovers: Ideas and innovations are easily shared within a trading bloc,
promoting creativity and fostering innovation.
Greater foreign investment: Member countries often see an influx of foreign
investment due to the attractive and larger market provided by the bloc.
Better quality intermediate inputs at world prices: Trading blocs often provide
access to high-quality raw materials and intermediate goods at competitive global
prices.
Higher interdependence among members of the regional trading bloc results
in reduced potential conflicts: As countries trade more with each other, their
economies become intertwined, making conflicts less likely due to mutual economic
interests.
Disadvantages of the Trading Blocs
Potential Harm to Low-skilled Workers: There can be negative impacts on low-
skilled workers, especially if there's an influx of low-skilled labor-intensive imports
from other member countries.
151
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Adjustment Costs: As import competition might cause inefficient firms to shut down,
workers in these firms may become temporarily unemployed until they find new
opportunities.
Long-term Employment Losses: Workers displaced due to regional integration might
face enduring wage losses if they don't secure jobs that pay as much as their previous
ones or if they remain unemployed for extended periods.
Concerns Over National Sovereignty: There are apprehensions about national
sovereignty, especially when countries of varying sizes and economic strengths are part
of the same trading bloc. This can create power imbalances and challenges in decision-
making.
Challenges to Greater Integration
Cultural and Historical Barriers: Cultural differences, along with historical
considerations such as wars and conflicts, can interfere with the social and political
processes required for deeper integration.
Restrictions on Independent Economic and Social Policies: A significant degree
of economic integration can restrict member countries from pursuing their economic
and social policies independently. With free trade, as well as the mobility of labor and
capital, policies aimed at controlling relative prices or quantities within a country can
be countered. Moreover, in a monetary union, countries can't control monetary policy,
and currency devaluation or revaluation isn't an option to address persistent
imbalances. When such imbalances occur, they can lead to crises that have
repercussions for other countries, as seen in the Greek fiscal crisis in 2010.
Investment Implications
From an investment perspective, regional integration offers new opportunities for trade and
investment. However, differences in culture, tastes, and competitive conditions that exist within
152
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.member countries may limit the potential benefits of investments within a trading bloc. Problems
faced by individual members within a trade bloc may also rapidly spread to other members
within the bloc.
153
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.Question
If Columbia and Ecuador have free trade between themselves and a common policy
excluding non-members from this free trade, then they are a part of a:
A. Customs union.
B. Free trade area.
C. Common market.
Solution
The correct answer is A.
Customs unions allow free movement of goods and services and also form a mutual
policy against non-members.
B is incorrect. A free trade area is a grouping of countries where trade barriers are
abolished.
C is incorrect. A common market is a free trade area with relatively free movement
of capital and services.
154
© 2014-2024 AnalystPrep.
